In this lesson we will look at the residuals of our regression and we will check for problems and also
validate our regression model.
At the moment our model looks something like this.
We dropped two features so we only have 11 features instead of the original 13.
And we're also using log prices because we transformed our target data.
Let me change the notation here a little bit and write y hat on the left hand side of the equation.
What we're looking at here is the equation to predict a property price given some information about
that property in our notation y hat is that properties predicted to value the predicted value is calculated
from all the theta parameters and all the values of the individual features.
And it's important to remember that in our notation Y is not equal to y hat the predicted value is not
the same as the target value.
And as a matter of fact there will usually be a difference between the two there usually will be a difference
between their predicted value and the actual true value and what we can do is we can subtract the predicted
value from the observed target value.
And when we do that what we're left with is called the residual.
So if the observed target value for property is say 50 and our predicted value from our model is equal
to 48 then the residual is equal to to 50 minus 48 is equal to 2.
The math here isn't gonna get anybody excited but this is what we do for all the 400 odd individual
data points in our training dataset.
We will do this very unexciting bit of math for all the predicted values and all the target values and
how since we have 400 for Target values in our training dataset we have four hundred and four predicted
or fitted values as well.
And this means we have four hundred and four residuals.
The key is what these 400 and four residuals look like as a group.
But why.
I hear you asking across time and space why are we looking at these residuals.
Why do the residuals matter.
Here's the thing.
Our regression relies on certain assumptions hits like your back at your real estate office in Boston
and you're looking out the window and you're thinking man the real world is a really complicated place.
I can't model all this.
I know what I'm going to do.
I want to make my life easier by making some very very crude assumptions.
Maybe something like a simple linear model will be good enough.
Now here's the thing.
If these crude assumptions that we're making more or less hold up then our simplified model is useful
hits not hundred percent correct but it will be something that we can use in practice and our results
that we get back the numbers that are Python code spits out have meaning.
But if the assumptions that we're making don't hold it all all we get back is a whole bunch of rubbish.
Now I'm talking a lot about simplifying assumptions that we're making but what are we talking about
here.
Concretely we actually covered one of the key simplifying assumptions already on the lesson on data
transformations.
We are assuming linearity.
For starters we are currently fitting a linear model to our data.
We are assuming that a linear model is more or less appropriate and we even transformed our data to
make it better fit our linearity assumption.
But there are some other key assumptions as well.
For starters we like to think that our model can more or less explain what's actually going on in the
real world.
I mean after all we have a high R squared and our eleven features together explain about 75 percent
of the variance in property prices.
So this means that what's left unexplained.
Yeah the residuals the difference between our predictions and the actual values should be random.
The part that we're missing from our model shouldn't have a clear pattern.
Where can we see what's missing from our model.
Well in the residuals right we can spot what's missing in the differences between the target values
and our predicted values.
If there's a pattern in the residuals then there's also some predictive information in the residuals.
And if there's predictive information in the residuals then that predictive information is missing from
our model.
Makes sense right.
The only thing you're asking about now is well what kind of patrons do I have to watch out for.
Right.
What what are you talking about.
Patterns.
So let me show you a few examples.
Let me show you a few plots of patterns that are indicative of problems in our regression and how every
dataset is different.
And there's many many possible variations but there's also some common type of problems that have particular
patterns that you might see.
So I'm going to show you some examples of problematic residual plots so you can get a feel for what's
coming up in our Python analysis.
Here we see a plot of the residual values versus our predicted values and there's clearly a relationship
being traced out in the residuals.
It's not a linear relationship but it's definitely a pattern.
Now of course the same thing holds.
If you see this pattern the other way around.
If you plot your residuals and you see a cone shape like this where the residuals are small for smaller
predictions and where the residuals are large for larger predictions then you also have a problem.
And this blunt the residuals get larger and larger the larger the prediction is.
So this is also a problem that you should watch out for if you see it in your residuals.
Now what do you see.
This kind of plot.
This looks more random already but you can see that there are these kind of vertical clusters in the
plot.
The residuals are grouping together and you might see this kind of pattern when there are some features
like missing from your model that are very important or when there are some interactions between the
features that you're not capturing.
Here's another plot that you might see at some point.
This is the kind of classic outlier plot.
If you see this kind of thing then you should take a look at what that lonely data point in the top
right corner actually represents and why it's there.
And lastly in our gallery of bad residual plots we've got this one here.
Here we see an unbalanced y axis.
Most of the residuals are sitting right at the bottom but there's also a few massive ones at the top
of the chart.
Again if you see this kind of shape you have to take another look at your data and maybe consider a
data transformation for a better fit for your model.
The point I'm trying to make here with this gallery is that any non-random pattern in the residuals
indicates that there is an issue because just like humans regressions can actually suffer from like
many illnesses and these have to be diagnosed on a case by case basis for example it's possible that
you're missing an important feature from your data.
It's possible that you need to transform your data.
It's possible that there's some interaction between the features that you need to capture and it's possible
that the features in the model are not capturing some kind of important explanatory information that's
then leaking into the residuals and creating these patterns.
So the question you might ask is well OK so you've showed me a lot of these terrible plots that you
know hopefully I'll never see in my own work.
What would a healthy residual plot look like.
What do we want to see from our plot of residuals.
Well we don't wanna see patterns that's for sure.
So here's two examples without clear patterns.
So here we've got a plot of well not that many data points but they're kind of scattered about in a
pretty random fashion.
This is what you would kind of expect to see.
Would you like to venture a guess as to what you should see when there's loads and loads of data points.
You'll want to see something like this.
You'll want to see kind of like a cloud shape where most of the residuals are centered around zero and
the cloud is more or less symmetric.
There isn't a bias for say like high predictions or low predictions.
You kind of want symmetry there and you want them to be centered around zero because in an ideal world
or the perfect dataset fitted by the perfect model the residuals are actually normally distributed or
close to normally distributed and this normality assumption is also pretty important actually.
The thing you have to remember is that assuming normality doesn't apply to our target values doesn't
apply to our house prices.
And assuming normality most certainly does not apply to our features but normality is something that
we look for in our residuals.
Do you remember what characterizes a normal distribution one of the things that we can look at well
we can look at the skew and the mean right.
Both the skew and the mean should be equal to zero.
Now in truth normality is maybe not as important as not having a pattern in the residuals.
And there is a famous quote by the statistician George Box actually.
So he said the statistician knows that in nature there never was a normal distribution there never was
a straight line yet with normal and linear assumptions known to be false.
He can often derive results which match to a useful approximation those found in the real world.
That's a really long quote actually.
But the gist of it is this all models are wrong but some models are useful.